Should there be one central agency to direct
oceanography in this country?
No, I don't think so. I think it
always seems very tidy to have it that way. And it is
something that the congressmen always seem to
want, something they can understand. It's a
wiring program. They'd like a simple wiring
program where they can see everything nice and
neat and tidy. But I think the strength of the
American system is, well, it's based on its
performance. I mean, we're way, way ahead of the
Russians, for example, in oceanography, way
ahead of the rest of the world. And we do more
oceanography in all of Western Europe together.
The Russians, the congressmen and some people are
wanting to claim the Russians are ahead of us. And
this is mainly a gambit, I guess, to get more
funding. And they quote ship tonnages and things
like that. But the Russian works are simply,
although it's very tidy, I'm trying to point out
that they have a very, very You can understand
their wiring diagram very well. You can see Venero
and the various agencies. It's very nicely
organized. But it just doesn't run. Because the
strength of our system is that
it is so loose and so loosely structured We have
industrial groups. We have university groups. We
have governmental groups. And
we know our communications are sufficiently good
that we don't duplicate work. I mean, we know what
other people are doing. The literature is very
good. We're in contact. So we don't want to do
something someone else is doing. So the problem
with duplication, that seems to
bother congressmen and so forth, it really
doesn't exist. We're much better off having a very
loosely structured
system, such as we have. Once
you have a very formalized large group and you're
just a small pond somewhere down, You get paid just
as much for marching as you do for fighting. And you
have all these people above you and you try to write
a paper and all these people are correcting your
English and controlling what you do. It's
very difficult for people to ever be creative or to
get something out. The reason I've been
productive over the years is in spite of the
system, I've always felt that I was
bypassing it or disobeying. The letter of the rule
should say, just get something done, getting
proper clearances for publishing papers. Try to
get clearance, the thing will last for years. I
mean, these things go through channels and they
get lost somewhere.
I wrote the first paper about economic
use of manganese nodules and published it in the
California Journal of Mines and Geology. Well,
this had to be sent to Washington for clearance,
and it was two years. I had to search for it and find
it. Finally, it came back, and I finally, but I
mean, it just was hopeless to get something,
something. These idea procedures, clearance
procedures, seemed to be very useful and they're
reasonable but the steps are such that you're you
get to the point where a great many people rather
than trying to fight the system just do nothing
they just drift along so
even now in my present position where I am right now
you see I retired as the first of the year and I'm
here as a guest of NOAA as an emeritus scientist And
this to me is a great feeling of freedom to me
because now I can do just what I want to do. And I'm
here as a guest but as a retiree without salary and
I'm my own person and I can write something and I'm
not beholden. I don't have this need to be
concerned about being a government employee.
I can do things in my own right. And this, of course,
is a great pleasure being a university professor,
which I am now. I'm a visiting professor at two
universities this year. And so to me to go to
university and be completely free and just not
have to consult other people about what I'm doing
and what I'm writing and where I'm publishing,
this to me is really great. It's really wonderful
to have this freedom to do this.
Uh, describe your experiences in the USSR in, in 64
and in 66, speaking of relationships with
governments. Well, this, this to me was a very, uh,
interesting experience. And I, I've written a
couple of papers about it and you may have seen
them. And, uh, many things are, are,
you, you, you, I've always regarded myself as sort
of a liberal and I've always been sort of I guess
friendly to Russians and Russian ideas and
I
came away with great mixed feelings of course I
went there also with mixed feelings but I and I
still and not at all naive about the Russian system
and the Soviets. But I think I can detect their
philosophy and their flaws. I think, first of all,
Churchill referred to Russia as being a paradox
wrapped inside of an enigma. Nothing could be
further wrong. the
things in Russia are exactly what you would expect
and everyone is goose-stepping they're all in
everything is orderly and
you can you can learn To me, living in the U.S. is
like a game of chess. You can jump there, you can
jump there, you can jump out of government. If you
don't like your boss, you can do this, you can go
elsewhere. If you have a job in Washington and
you're not happy where you are, you just take a job
elsewhere in the city and drive a different
direction. And you can't do this in Russia. It's
like a game of checkers. And everywhere you're
blocked, you're in a very strict hierarchy.
There's no service except the government
service. It's only one way up. sort of a dead man's
shoes development, and you have to wait for people
to. So you have this, even if you're not controlled
by your superiors and by their thoughts, you're in
a system where any advancement involves these
people. So even if it's not an overt control of your
work, you're very highly controlled, and this is a
very sterile sort of life. and it's the idea of the
Soviet Union being advanced
technologically or socially is rather
ridiculous they're very Victorian in all their
mores and their science too I mean their ideas are
it's I just reviewed a paper here
for Sea Frontiers of this book called The World
Rift System or something like that. This book,
they still don't believe in continental drift. I
mean, it's rather, it's archaic. Of course, it's a
book published a couple years ago, but even so,
they're just so far behind the times in their
notions and ideas that they just really aren't
with the modern world.
Well, the... You must give them credit for what
they've done, of course. But you wonder how they do
it. And I have the feeling that they do it more or
less the way we did things in the Army. If you send
two men to do a job and they can't do it, you send
four. If four can't do it, you send eight. So it's a
very massive sort of pondering approach to
solutions of projects. But it's not a very... It's
a very stifling system. Why specifically did you
go to the Soviet Union in 64 and 66? Why did I go?
Well,
I guess the first time I went, I was
invited to be on the delegation of At that time, we
had set up these exchanges, of course, and I was
invited to participate as a member of that
delegation, as the marine geologist
geophysicist. And so I was very anxious to see the
Soviet Union, and I thought I could do a useful job.
And so I accepted and was on this team.
This is one of the advantages of being in
Washington, DC. These nice things happen to you
when you're in Washington, which never happened
to you when you're out in the field. Things like
this are organized in Washington. And if you're
there, you're likely to be invited. But if you're
somewhere else, like down in Miami, your chances
of being invited to participate are minimal. And I
returned in 66 to the Second International
Oceanographic Congress.
Of course, I was extremely interested in
developments in the Soviet Union, just as a
scientific and cultural problem to really
see how a system which, you know, seems to be
beautifully organized, they have all the very
simple correct wiring diagrams and so forth, why
it didn't work. I was interested in knowing why it
didn't work. Because it would appear to be a model
of efficiency, you know, but it's a... And you go
there and you'll find out, soon realize that the
flaws in the system, the fact that they're too
tightly coupled. How did meteorites fit into your
career? Well, I... As I explained in the
beginning, an interest of mine was in astronomy.
And I went to University of Illinois, even with the
idea of possibly majoring in astronomy. But I was
not inspired by the particular professor there,
Professor Baker, the one man astronomy
department. So I took some course in astronomy,
but I didn't go beyond that. But I did retain this
interest in
in astronomy and in the moon as a geological
object, because we could see the features on the
moon. And I, in fact, when I submitted an idea for a
PhD thesis, I submitted the idea that I should try
to interpret the lunar surface. And this proposal
of mine was declined by the University of
Illinois. Well, I'd like to say because they told
me, I guess rather facetiously, that there's no
way of checking my field work. Actually, there was
no professor there who was interested in sort of
sponsoring this work that I could work under, and
so I worked on these deep-sea clays instead, but I
did have this interest, and when I was in the Air
Force, I was involved in photo mapping, so I became
very interested in this aspect of remote sensing,
and of course we see more or less an aerial map of the
moon.
So I, and I was aware as a student in Illinois of the
structure at Ketlin, which was then called a
cryptovolcanic structure caused by some hidden
volcanic explosion, and I
visited during World War II on
I had occasion to fly around in connection with
training flights, and one time with transferring
aircraft, I would stop close by and get out to this
quarry and study it, and had these features we call
shatter cones, which, and I reasoned that, well,
this is one of those ideas that come to you ahead of
time, and you go to the field to check it. I thought
the orientation of the shatter cone should reveal
what the force came from above or from below, once
you turn the rocks to their pre-event position to a
horizontal position. And this concept was sort of
really confirmed by this visit. I saw that the
rocks, the shatter cones pointed upward and
therefore the force came from above, therefore it
was likely caused by a cosmic impact and not by a
force from below as from volcanism. So I then wrote
this paper on this orientation of shatter cones
and pointed out this must be a meteorite impact
feature. And then I more or less forgot about this
field, not entirely because I, when I was with ONR,
I was, I didn't want to just be an administrator
entirely. So I would, when I went to Germany, I also
visited the Steinhain Basin and the Reese Basin,
which were two examples of this type of impact
feature, which we now know known to be, but were
thought to be volcanic. And so I always took
advantage of these travels to do some geology. As
I've done on all my oceanography trips, I've
always tried to do some land geology at various
remote parts of the world.
And so I wrote this paper on these shatter cones and
the probable impact origin of these features in
Germany. And along In 58 or 56 I guess the Sputnik
thing came along and this was a big event of course
scientifically and initiation of the space
program so I
at that time I visited about 58 I guess I visited I
was invited down to the McDonald Observatory by
Gerard Kuiper in Texas with Gene Schumacher and
two other people and we were, Gene Schumacher
became head of the Astrogeology program for the
USGS. But we were looking at the moon through the
telescope and I told him I thought I knew where
there was a lunar crater on the earth. At least the
counterpart. This was the Sierra Madera impact
structure and had a certain structural style. And
so we visited one day during the day because it had
clouded over and we couldn't observe at night. And
sure enough, this was a shatter cone structure. So
this was very important, I think, in triggering
the
search for more of these features and for This has
resulted in much work by the U.S. Logical Survey
looking at these sites, which are, I guess,
demonstrated now to be the lunar counterparts of
lunar craters. They are terrestrial
counterparts of lunar craters.
Now, what about international cooperation on
oceanographic voyages? I'm thinking
particularly about MIDPAC and the Indian Ocean
experience.
How did you feel about this? What were your
experiences on these voyages? Well, MIPAC, I
guess, was not an international cooperation.
This was between Scripps and the Navy.
The international cooperation, I guess the first
event there was the Indian Ocean, the
International Indian Ocean Expedition.
I think it was a good thing to I think oceanography
acted as sort of the focal point for bringing
countries together, particularly from behind
the Iron Curtain. I think in the Indian Ocean
Expedition, countries all really worked more or
less separately and used this as a... The first of
these things, of course, was the Second
International Geophysical Year in 1958.
And this was a mechanism of going to the highest
levels of government, even the Congress, and
getting funding because you had something which
was big enough for them to, or a mission which was
large enough for them to fund as a separate entity.
And it was not a very efficient way of doing
scientific work. it was useful in using science as
a platform or as a focal point for bringing
countries together socially and economically in
other ways. But I think for the amount of money
spent, you'd be better off to have not to do it as
international projects, but just simply as
national projects because,
again, these if you go back to the Russian analogy
of a large ship and all these programs 60, 80
scientists on the ship all with different
programs doing marine biology and this and that
and other things they really don't this is not a
very efficient way of doing doing scientific work
the most efficient ships in the world doing
scientific work for the least amount of money have
been ships like the Lamont ship the
uh which did purely geophysics all around the
world. This ship has been uniquely productive.
Much more important work than these huge floating
hotels. And the same way the international work is
useful for doing certain things, but it's not a
very productive way or efficient way of getting
scientific results. Would you say the same about
mid-pack?
Well, the Midpac expedition was
not in its level. All involved was two other small
ships, one Navy ship, one Scripps ship. And I was
the chief scientist for the Navy group of
scientists, and Roger Bell was the chief
scientist for the Scripps ship. And I guess the
importance of Midpac is that it it got Scripps away
from coastal oceanography. It got them going
doing deep sea. It was the first of their series of
deep sea expeditions, which went on, still going
on today. The Navy made this one effort to do it, and
we had the... But then the Navy folded up the
program. They wouldn't really give us any more
support to do more or less deep sea work, except on
this sort of, you know, continuing basis, where
Scripps went on to... to doing this work, I
identified them. We got some very good results. I
mean, the main result was discovering the
Mid-Pacific Mountains and the geos and the age of
the Mid-Pacific Mountains. So, this was the
opening wedge that got Scripps started in
deep-sea oceanography, but it was abortive as far
as the Navy is concerned, getting the Navy
involved in deep-sea oceanography.
Your early work on minerals in the sea, one of the
things that you're rightly well known for, what do
you look upon the sea as a potential producer of
minerals for man?
Well, the sea is somewhat disappointing.
There are several aspects of the sea. One, of
course, are the continental shelves and slopes,
which are simply extensions of the land. And what
you have on land will occur offshore, but it will be
more difficult and expensive to get at. The
important item here, of course, is the
hydrocarbons. And since hydrocarbons tend to
occur in sedimentary basins, And in young
sedimentary basins, these tend to be at margins of
continents. So the marginal regions may be very
productive. Now we're getting about, I think,
somewhere between 15 to 20% of our oil from
offshore. This is bound to increase. But when we
say offshore, we're including things like Lake
Maracaibo and so forth, which are really not you
know not open shelf
as far as deep-sea concerned the only it must think
in terms of the hydrosphere the water itself and
the of course we get
now we get salt magnesium bromine from seawater
and also iodine from ocean plants uh but the the the
water is uniform over the world and although it's
nice having these standpoint of process of
processing to have these these ions in solution
they're very the the dilution is so low and so
constant people talk for example of the ocean
containing a hundred million dollars worth of
gold per cubic mile an exaggeration but even if
it's not a cubic mile of water is an enormous amount
of material the total hydrocarbons oil produced
over the years is only about one cubic mile and so
Even a cubic mile of granite contains $500 million
worth of five times as much gold as a cubic mile of
seawater. But no one would think of mining just
granite. You have to high-grade it. You have to
look for the veins. Well, in the ocean water, we
have no veins. No high-grade deposits of these
things. It's all uniform. Regarding the ocean
floor, there are, first
you think in terms of the sediments, then more or
less the ocean crust itself. now the sediments we
have the the sedimentary orthogenic deposits
like the manganese nodules and phosphorite
nodules these are not ores today but one one day
presumably will be and
uh and the ocean crust itself the ocean crust
itself is it's too bad that the oceans were
generated the way they were because the ocean
crust is just pure tholiatic basalt, ocean
tholiite. This is remarkably uniform material
and it's like trying to look for mineral deposits
in Hawaii or Iceland. It's not a very good
territory for looking for mineral deposits
because to have mineral deposits you must have
metamorphism and you'd rather have old terrain
rather than young terrain you'd rather have it
reprocessed geologically many times to develop
veins and that sort of thing so the ocean is way
overrated as a storehouse of minerals it's also
way overrated as a storehouse as a cornucopia of
food and it's not going to supply the expanding
populations at all we really can't look to the
ocean to do this this is rather a a sad story of
marine geology, but that's, those are the facts.
It's not very optimistic.
I'm sure we can solve the legal hassles involved in
recovering manganese nodules, and I'm sure that
one day they will be economic, will become ours.
but I'm not so optimistic as some people are about
them I think it'll be some years before they do
become economic today the only thing we are
recovering from the only mineral resource if we
use that word for recovering from the deep ocean
floor or from seamounts is precious coral this is
the only resource we have now from the deep ocean
which is being recovered economically so really
the mineral potential in the oceans is somewhat
overrated.
Of course, we do have this
problem of the hydrothermal deposits, which
we're finding in mid-ocean rifts associated with
aqueous solutions, which may be economic. And we
do also have the Red Sea situation of red sea brines
and their associated deposits but this is this is a
very unique environment we can't expect to find
these brines elsewhere because it involves the
rising of hot water solutions through giant salt
deposits